Add developper documentation for GPU computations (#793)
JuliaMolSim/DFTK.jl: docs/src/developer/gpu_computations.md

# GPU computations

> GPU computations in DFTK is very much a work in progress. The goal is to build on

Reviewer: That's a bit pessimistic

Julia's multiple dispatch to have the same code base for CPU and GPU. We hope we

> will be able to reach decent performances without having to write any kernels at all,

Reviewer: performance

only by relying on the high level functionalities implemented in the GPU packages.

To go even further with this idea of unified code, we would also like to be able to

> support any type of GPU architecture: unlike other packages, we do not want to

Reviewer: that's not very nice :-P I think everybody wants that

Author: Haha, I didn't want to be mean. I just wanted to point out that we were being quite ambitious as support for multiple GPU architectures doesn't seem to be the standard for the moment.

Reviewer 2: > doesn't seem to be the standard for the moment.

Well. Everyone wants to, but some people struggle to make it happen. But the major codes (e.g. VASP, SIRIUS-QE) have it now for CUDA, AMD and Intel.

hard-code the use of a specific architecture, say a NVIDIA CUDA GPU. In order to do
this, DFTK uses [GPUArrays](https://github.com/JuliaGPU/GPUArrays.jl), which is the
counterpart of `AbstractArray` but for GPU arrays.

Currently the three main GPU architectures are [CUDA](https://github.com/JuliaGPU/CUDA.jl),

> [ROCm](https://github.com/JuliaGPU/AMDGPU.jl) and [OneAPI](https://github.com/JuliaGPU/oneAPI.jl).

Author: Actually, I wanted to remind the reader that there are currently three big GPU architectures, and that they all have their dedicated package. However, we don't want (and don't really need to) use any of those specific packages, we can just rely on GPUArrays.
As you pointed out, it's probably not the best place to put it. I'm going to rephrase this.

> [ROCm](https://github.com/JuliaGPU/AMDGPU.jl) and [OneAPI](https://github.com/JuliaGPU/oneAPI.jl).

Reviewer 2: sounds much better now!

## Current implementation

For now, GPU computations are done by specializing the `architecture` keyword argument
when creating the basis. `architecture` should be an initialized instance of
the (non-exported) `CPU` and `GPU` structures. `CPU` does not require any argument,
but `GPU` requires the type of array which will be used for GPU computations.

> ```@example gpu_computations

Author: I was a bit confused with the `@example` and `@setup` macros. I also didn't knew you could make a ```julia block. Thanks!

PlaneWaveBasis(model; Ecut, kgrid, architecture = DFTK.CPU())
PlaneWaveBasis(model; Ecut, kgrid, architecture = DFTK.GPU(CuArray))
```
Those `CPU` and `GPU` structures we inspired by the structures of same name in

> [Oceananigans](https://github.com/CliMA/Oceananigans.jl). **However, it is very**

Reviewer 2: Well sort of. I would not put Oceananigans here as we got inspired from a couple of directions.

**likely that this API will change.** We hope that a unified convention will emerge,
instead of having every package define their own way of dealing with computations on
multiple architectures.

Not all terms can be used when doing GPU computations: currently, the `Anyonic`,

> `Magnetic`, `TermPairwisePotential` and `Xc` terms are not supported. Symmetries

Reviewer: What's wrong with symmetries? They should work, no?

Reviewer: Also xc worked I thought?

Author: You're right for symmetries: I thought they didn't work, but there is actually not reason they shouldn't.
Xc doesn't work yet. I am building the model using the `model_DFT` function, but by giving an empty array for the functionals, so the Xc term is left out.

should also be disabled. Nothing has yet been made to enable GPU support for

> automatic differentiation.

Reviewer 2: sounds good now!

## Pitfalls
There are a few things to keep in mind when doing GPU programming in DFTK.
- Transfers to and from a device are a bit tricky because they are done by
converting the array to an other type (ex: `CuArray(A)`, `Array(A)`...). This
means that the array type used for computations should be stored somewhere:
currently, this is done by the `CPU` and `GPU` structures and the helper functions
`to_device` and `to_cpu`. `similar` could also be used, but then a reference array

> (one which already lives on the device) needs to be available at any time.

Reviewer 2: It feels a bit you are explaining the process how we arrived at our current solution. I would not emphasise this so much. I would more focus on how things should now be done. E.g. give examples to explain `to_device` and `to_cpu` and say that they should be preferred over a bare `CuArray(A)`. Then say briefly why. Also keep mentioning `similar` and probably add a reference to `zeros_like`.

> - Functions' arguments should always be isbits (immutable and contains no

Reviewer: functions executed on the GPU you mean

references to other values). This means that the model should never be given
to a function which will get executed on the GPU or it will fail: instead, only the

> relevant field should be passed.

Reviewer 2: Pretty hard to follow. Best explain by an example.

# GPU computations

> GPU computations in DFTK is a work in progress. The goal is to build on

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Performing GPU computations in DFTK is still work in progress. The goal is to build on
```

the (non-exported) `CPU` and `GPU` structures. `CPU` does not require any argument,
but `GPU` requires the type of array which will be used for GPU computations.

```julia
PlaneWaveBasis(model; Ecut, kgrid, architecture = DFTK.CPU())
PlaneWaveBasis(model; Ecut, kgrid, architecture = DFTK.GPU(CuArray))
```

> **It is very likely that this API will change.**, based on the evolution of the
> Julia ecosystem concerning distributed architectures.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
!!! note "GPU API is experimental"
    It is very likely that this API will change, based on the evolution of the
    Julia ecosystem concerning distributed architectures.
```

Not all terms can be used when doing GPU computations: currently, the `Anyonic`,
`Magnetic`, `TermPairwisePotential` and `Xc` terms are not supported. Some mixings,
such as `χ0Mixing` are also not yet supported. GPU features are not yet exhaustively
 tested, and it is likely that some aspects of the code such as automatic
 differentiation or stresses will not work.

## Pitfalls
There are a few things to keep in mind when doing GPU programming in DFTK.
- Transfers to and from a device can be done simply by converting an array to
an other type. However, hard-coding the new array type (such as writing
`CuArray(A)` to move `A` to a CUDA GPU) is not cross-architecture, and can
be confusing for developers working only on the CPU code. These data transfers
should be done using the helper functions `to_device` and `to_cpu` which
provide a level of abstraction while also allowing multiple architectures
to be used.
```julia
cuda_gpu = DFTK.GPU(CuArray)
cpu_architecture = DFTK.CPU()
A = rand(10) # A is on the CPU
B = DFTK.to_device(cuda_gpu, A) # B is a copy of A on the CUDA GPU
B .+= 1.
C = DFTK.to_cpu(B) # C is a copy of B on the CPU

> D = DFTK.to_device(cpu_architecture, B) # Equivalent to the previous line, but      should be avoided as it is less clear

Reviewer 2: keep an eye on code formatting ... usual dftk guidelines apply.

```
*Note:* `similar` could also be used, but then a reference array

> (one which already lives on the device) needs to be available at any time.

Reviewer 2: at any time. Hmm. Rather at call time (similar allocates a new array).

Author: I meant that when you are developing code, you always need to have some sort of reference array at hand: sometimes, this means adding a new argument to a function which will only be used to know what type of device is being used.

Reviewer 2: Well but in this case you need the `cpu_architecture` at hand. I don't see why one is an advantage over the other.

Author: Hum, that's true.

This was done previously, with helper functions to easily build new arrays
on a given architecture: see for example
[`zeros_like`](https://github.com/JuliaMolSim/DFTK.jl/pull/711/commits/ce5da66009440bd8552429eb8cfe96944da16564).
- Functions which will get executed on the GPU should always have arguments
which are isbits (immutable and contains no references to other values).
When using `map`, also make sure that every structure used is also isbits.
For example, the following map will fail, as `model` contains strings and

> arrays which are not on the GPU.

Reviewer 2: are not `isbits`.
